Welcome. Oil reserves around the world have been drawn down, some to their lowest ever levels. Has this deal arrived in the nick of time? Absolutely, yeah. It's a really important time because if this continued, we could begin to very dangerous levels. We've been insulated so far because a number of countries have had very large reserves. I'm talking about China and Japan here. Both have, last year, they both built up their reserves because prices were relatively low and also we're producing more oil than what we actually consumed around the world. So we've been fortunate for those two countries. How do Australia's own reserves look like at the moment? Well, we've never had good reserves. And this whole conflict and the closure of the Strait of the Ministry has exposed how vulnerable we are to the supply shocks because Australia, being a member of the International Energy Agency, which has advised all its members to have 90 days of stocks, we haven't abided by that. We've spent that since 2012. So we spent all that period just on minimal stock levels, which is kind of, the consumers have benefited from that because they're not paying for the storage costs. So it's kind of been a just in time, but that's not really good when we're facing situations like this, when there's a supply crunch. Okay, so the war has seen enormous damage to energy facilities and distribution points in the Middle East. How quickly can production realistically ramp up once the Strait is open? You've got the shippers, you know, they have got to kind of be aligned because there's only a certain amount of shipping that can get through. I think before the conflict, there's roughly about 130 ships that were making the transit through the Strait, which takes about eight hours, roughly. We've also got damage to infrastructure. It's also, you can't just, once you've shut oil or gas field in, you can't just switch it on overnight. It does take a period of ramping up. So in the short term, I mean, it's going to be weeks before we start seeing the first flows of oil or gas. But we're probably going to be well into next year before we're actually back to where we were just before this conflict started. Okay, so what does that then mean for energy markets in the short and medium term? We did see a drop, of course, in the price of Brent crude immediately after today's news was announced. But are we going to see prices return to their pre -war levels anytime soon? So they've got to a high of about $125 a barrel. So we know we needed that. We're around at 83. We're talking about Brent crude here. But their low before the war was about 60. So we're not too far off. You know, the world can live with an $80 a barrel. But for Australia particularly, because we're a large importer of a product, it was what the key prices were, the diesel, and that had reached record levels. I mean, it wasn't even this high four years ago when Russia widened its invasion of Ukraine. But those prices have come down as well. So that's going to be good for the consumers. Australia's petroleum statistics for April were released today. What did they show about how the energy shock changed the way, or didn't, that Australians are consuming fuel? What we saw in the April data was a further decline in gasoline use and also jet fuel use is below what it was pre -conflict. So people are travelling less domestically, but also more importantly international, because we actually consume more jet fuel flying internationally than we did. So, you know, we're now down about three year lows for jet fuel. And if things continue, we'll probably be, we would have consumed less this financial year than the previous financial year. Kevin Morrison, good to speak to you. Thank you. Turning to the share market and the ASX 200 and all odds closed higher, both up over 1 % on news of the ceasefire. The Aussie dollar rose too. It's buying 70 .76 US cents. Well, the ceasefire agreement was announced as monetary board members of the Reserve Bank began deliberating whether to adjust the cash rate from 4 .35%. Financial markets expect the RBA to leave the rate on hold tomorrow. And a growing number of bank economists say the next likely move will be the next cash rate. The next move is down. Among them, HSBC Australia's chief economist, Paul Bloxham. Welcome. Does the US -Iran ceasefire agreement take some pressure off the RBA to address again ongoing high inflation with an interest rate hike? Well, it's a good story, isn't it? If the straighter form was is reopened over time and we head back to some semblance of normal in terms of that trading flow, and that's going to help free up what is a supply constraint at the moment. I think we have to be really cautious that this is one step in a process, that it's going to take time to reopen. There's a lot of disruption that's happened. The RBA will look at this certainly as positive news that we're heading towards some semblance of normal. Even before the news was announced, you had said that you expect the RBA's next move will be down. Why? When inflation continues to be above the target? Well, it's certainly, we still have an inflation challenge. And I think the RBA is still going to note that. They're going to note that inflation is too much lower. This is too high. This is the primary focus and so on. But at the same time, I think over the last little while, the last couple of months, we've seen some really clear signs that growth is weakening quite quickly in the economy. GDP in the first quarter was weaker than expected. And then the range of partials where business confidence has fallen, consumer sentiments at a low level. We've seen household spending fall in April, employment fall in April, the unemployment rate rise to a four and a half year high in April, auction clearance rates are declining, house prices are declining. There's a lot of indicators that tell us that we slowed down in the first quarter and growth is too high. And that growth probably weakens even further into the second quarter. So I think with that, the RBA is unlikely to be convinced that they'll have to lift interest rates any further from here. Firmly on hold this week. And then we think that this is the peak. So the next move we think is down, but not for some time. I mean, this is the key difference between this and previous cycles. All those things can weaken, but we've still got an inflation challenge. So the RBA has to sit still for an extended period while it puts downward pressure on the economy. You are painting quite a negative picture of some key economic indicators. You've warned before of the potential this year for recession. Are we likely to see it? Well, we think our central case is that we are in a downturn in the second quarter, that actually GDP will end up contracting in the second quarter of this year. But as we've talked about just then, if we make progress globally, if the strata form was reopened, some of the pressures come off. That's the sort of thing that we're factoring into our forecasts for supporting at least some positive growth into the second half of this year. So we have a downturn, a weakening, almost a needed weakening, actually. I mean, the economy needs to slow down if we're going to get inflation down. But we haven't penciled in a recession as a central case. And that's still the view we carry. If a recession does indeed occur, will it be the recession Australia had to have? Or has the federal government's budget changes contributed to slowing the economy quite sharply at the same time that the RBA was trying to put the brakes on with its interest rate rises? Well, I think there are two parts to that. I mean, the first one is I do think the economy needs to have some sort of a downturn. I think it's already starting to arrive. And yes, I think it does have to happen. I don't think you can keep growing at the rates we were through last year and even in the last year. I think it's going to go into the sort of year on rate, year rate for the first quarter of this year and think that growth will, that inflation will come back down to the Reserve Bank's targets. There's no other real way to get inflation down fast enough at this point. And then in terms of what the budget's done, I think, you know, I think the budget has shaken confidence a bit. And I think it's also got a very clear design feature, which is to try to put downward pressure on house prices to improve housing affordability. And so I think that is going to take a bit of the strength out of the economy, the momentum out of the economy as well. Is the Assistant Minister Daniel Molino right when he says many bank chief economists believe the tax changes will remove distortions from the system? Are you in that cap? I think so. I think we can say that the design of the tax changes will help to remove some of the distortions in the housing space. So that very clearly in the housing space. What about in the business and investment space? Well, I think there, I think it's more of an open question. The fact that the CGT discount was removed from the whole collection of assets is going to reshape what goes on in the business sector. And I think there's a question as to how that's going to play out. But I think there are a whole bunch of other things that could have been done to make the tax system more efficient. So things like looking at the GST, looking at lowering the personal income tax rates, looking at lowering corporate tax rates. Paul Bloxham, thank you. Thank you. And finally, the stock exchange operator, the ASX has admitted it misled investors on the ASX in 2022 about a major settlement system overhaul. It's facing a $20 million penalty after court action from the regulator ASIC. And that's all from the business. Thanks for watching. 

Hello and welcome to Asia Newsweek. I'm Yvonne Yong. This week, three Indian sailors killed by a US strike in the Gulf of Aman. Xi Jinping takes a trip to Pyongyang and how a snail race is helping rev up tourism for one Taiwanese town. But first, our top story in the southern Philippines, tens of thousands of thousands of people are in the Gulf of the Gulf of the Gulf. Thousands of people remain displaced after a 7 .8 magnitude earthquake. The quake struck off the coast of General Santos City in Mindanao, the country's main southern island, on Monday morning. Hundreds of aftershocks have been experienced in the days since, with the scale of destruction still being uncovered. Correspondent Tim Swansdon reports. 

Screams fill the air. 

As the ground shakes. A popular fast food building collapses, causing chaos in the city centre. Residents yelling out for one another. Hoping no one has been trapped in the rubble. Dozens of buildings were damaged by the powerful 7 .8 magnitude earthquake wreaking havoc across the southern Philippines island of Mindanao. 

School children on their first day back after the summer holiday. 

Reacting in terror. Holding each other tight and praying for safety. At schools across the region, violent and powerful shaking, bringing structures down around them. We're still monitoring the children, especially the one that in our areas, how they are. And, you know, the trauma they experience again. President Ferdinand Marcos Jr., in ordering the suspension of schools, also directed government agencies to offer assistance. People are definitely scared. And, you know, I mean, I wouldn't put it past them. They may want to sleep outside in some areas tonight. A region rattled with fears there may be more to come. Tim Swansdon, ABC News. To the conflict in the Middle East. And three Indian sailors have been killed after the U .S. military struck an oil tanker in the Gulf of Oman. Posting on X, U .S. Central Command accused the tanker's crew of violating the blockade and confirmed a U .S. aircraft fired two missiles into the ship's engine room. Well, the U .S. has struck three Indian crewed ships in the Gulf this week. India has lodged a strong protest with the U .S. and says the targeting of commercial shipping and sales. civilian infrastructure in the region must end. It's been one year since a London -bound Air India plane crashed shortly after takeoff, killing 260 people. Despite promises of transparency, the final investigation report is yet to be released, leaving key questions about what caused the disaster unresolved. South Asia correspondent Rachel Clayton reports. Among the chilli plants, a sub done by Chowdhury remembers the son who grew up watching him tend to these fields before building a life in London. 

I never dreamed that my son would go so far. He was the first person from our village to go abroad. 

That journey came to a devastating end a year ago when Air India flight 171, bound for London, crashed in the region crashed seconds after takeoff, killing all but one person on board. Mr Chowdhury's son, Kamlesh and his daughter -in -law, Thapu Ben, were among the victims. 

That day our lives were put into darkness. 

The plane crashed into medical college accommodation just two kilometres from Ahemdibad Airport. The twisted, charred remains of the building, a daily reminder to locals of the 19 people killed on the ground, including Hedalbun Pradrapati's husband, Mahesh Jarawalla. I lost my person. No one is concerned. Only the person who lost their dear one is affected. 

Investigators have spent the past year analysing flight data, cockpit recordings and wreckage from the Boeing 787. A preliminary investigation last year found fuel to both engines was cut off seconds after takeoff, causing a catastrophic loss of thrust. But a year on, investigators have not revealed why that happened. Under international rules, an interim update is now required, while the full investigation continues. 

When we have a report, we will know the answers and reasons for what happened. I feel the souls of those who lost their lives will then get peace. I will only be satisfied when I get justice. An anniversary that brings no closure. Rachel Clayton, ABC News. Thai princess Bhadra Kiti Yabba Narindira has died at the age of 47, the royal palace has announced. The eldest child of Thailand's king was hospitalised in December 2022 after a sudden loss of consciousness caused by a heart condition. She had been in a coma for three and a half years. From 2012 to 2014, she was Thailand's ambassador to Austria, Slovenia and Slovakia, and also founded a charity promoting the rights of female inmates. The government's expected to declare a period of national mourning. China's president has used a rare trip to North Korea to declare he's ready to strengthen ties. During his first visit to Pyongyang in seven years, Xi Jinping exchanged several statements of support with North Korean leader Kim Jong -un. But analysts remain doubtful it will result in any tangible progress between them. 

While Xi Jinping is no stranger to elaborate welcomes, in North Korea, it's a rarity. China is North Korea's biggest trade partner, and North Korea is China's only formal treaty ally. Separately, they remain polarising on the world stage, but between them came a wave of platitudes to expand cooperation politically, economically and culturally. 

I am ready to work with you, General Secretary, to take this visit as an opportunity to strengthen top -level planning and strategic guidance for China -DPRK relations in the new era. 

This visit shows the world that no matter how the international situation may evolve, time -tested DPRK -China relations remain unbreakable. 

But their official summaries of the visit revealed a few subtle differences. China emphasised its practical ties with the North and Beijing's ongoing initiatives for international order. Pyongyang, meanwhile, cast the summit as a pact of equal partners, a stance many in China don't necessarily share. 

I hope the two countries can continue to get along, but personally, I feel that while they may appear quite friendly on the surface, in reality, there are still many issues. North Korean state media did not mention if Pyongyang's nuclear ambitions or its relations with the US were discussed. Though Kim did reaffirm support for Beijing's One China principle, interpreted by many as part of China's push to consolidate international backing for its position on Taiwan. The individual effect of Pyongyang reaffirming Beijing's position isn't great. I mean, the DPRK already has a position that affirms and supports the PRC's position. It's really trying to create a pattern of support. Mr Chong says while China doesn't stand to gain much economically from the relationship, reducing North Korea's dependence on other countries remains a priority, in line with its desire to remain a so -called force for stability in the region and beyond. Manny Tsigas, ABC News. Taiwan's military has carried out a training exercise simulating an invasion by China. The drill was conducted along a 20 -kilometre stretch of coast and involved the firing of rockets to stop an amphibious assault. It's part of efforts to modernise Taiwan's armed forces. Taiwan conducts regular military exercises to prepare for a potential invasion by Beijing, which claims the island and the island is a as its territory. Japanese authorities have successfully captured a black bear that was spotted more than a dozen times in an urban area in central Japan. Footage shows specialists tranquilising the bear with a dart gun before loading it into a truck. Sightings of the bear had prompted city officials to close almost 100 local schools for two days. The adult bear, estimated to weigh around 100 kilograms, had last been seen 700 kilograms, from a university campus. Four Indonesian military officers have been sentenced to jail by a military court for throwing acid at a young activist, causing him severe burns. Their sentences range from one and a half to three years after the officers were found guilty on charges of serious premeditated assault. The court case has drawn global condemnation and raised fears that activists in Indonesia are not safe. And a warning, this story contains visions some might find confronting. It's the shocking attack that rocked Indonesia. CCTV capturing the moment 27 -year -old Andri Yunus was doused in sulfuric acid by intelligence officers. Andri is seen here moments after the attack, clawing the clothes off his body as bystanders rushed to help. I cried as did all our friends seeing his condition. It was a mix of hopelessness, disbelief, sadness and anger. He suffered severe burns to a quarter of his body. Andri is a well -known human rights advocate. Hello Andri. Hello Masjena. And the attack occurred shortly after he recorded a podcast railing against Indonesia's re -militarisation. Heading home after the episode, Andri was unaware he was being tailed by four military intelligence officers. Military prosecutors say those four men have confessed to carrying out the attack, saying they held a grudge against Andri. Last year he crashed a closed -door meeting of lawmakers who were discussing allowing the military to hold more roles across government. Andri's legal team to hold more. Andri's legal team questioned both the motive given by the officers and the fairness of a military court deciding the fate of their own. This is a sham constructed to ensure there is a formality of law enforcement to be resolved, to ensure there's a perpetrator and a penalty. The four military intelligence officers have been indicted on a range of offences, including premeditated serious assault. But ahead of their verdict and sentencing, prosecutors have requested they only be given two and a half years jail. Andri Younis remains in hospital. His advocacy has gained global attention, but at an enormous price. Tim Swanston, ABC News, Jakarta. A sparsely populated island in the Indian Ocean is set to be transformed into an international port, tourism hub and military outpost to rival Singapore. But critics say India's plan is overblown and threatens indigenous people, including those who are almost entirely isolated from the outside world. Lachlan Bennett reports. This island is home to some of the last uncontacted people on earth. The Champagne are hunter -gatherers who shun outsiders and reject the globalised world. But their home is about to be changed forever. By a billion -dollar megaport and military development. But why is India spending billions of dollars on a tiny island so far from the mainland? And what will that mean for the people who call it home? 

This is the Great Nicobar Island Project. It's India's plan to control trade, boost defence and counter the rise of China. It includes a freight terminal that can handle up to 20 million containers, an airport for 10 million passengers, a power plant, tourism hub and city for hundreds of thousands of people. It's impossible to imagine that the Champagne can survive. All of this is going to bring the Champagne into contact with outsiders, massively risking the disease as well as the destruction of their forest. 

Great Nicobar Island is home to around 300 Champagne, 1 ,000 indigenous people and 8 ,000 settlers. It's near another uncontacted community, the Sentinelese. These islands are Indian territory. So the project means that India will no longer need to rely on deep water ports in Singapore or Sri Lanka. And they're at the gate of one of the busiest shipping routes in the world. The Malacca Strait. This port will be for civilian purpose for the trade and commerce. But this can be used for defence purposes also, as it can accommodate large naval warships. 

China ships vast quantities of oil through the Malacca Strait. It has also developed a network of outposts across the region to secure its interests. 

But India's relationship with China has been strained in recent years, with border disputes in the north. So a military base on Nicobar Island could be advantageous should tensions ever escalate. If China has a strategic advantage at the land border, India can have some leverage and it may develop the capability to enforce a choke point blockade in the Malacca Strait. Proponents say that this project will help India extend its influence, enhance security monitoring and deter belligerent nations. Prime Minister Narendra Modi says it's important for strategic defence. But opposition leader Raul Gandhi says tourism developments have little to do with national security and residents are not being fairly compensated. And they're snatching away the land from people who were made to settle there. And they're snatching away the land from tribes. The government did not respond to ABC's request for comment. But it has hit back at critics with attack ads like this, saying Gandhi and the Congress are sabotaging India's national interest. They want foreign powers and enemies to keep controlling our vital seal aids. This is betrayal of the highest order. 

India's environment minister says the project will not threaten tribal groups or Nicobar's sensitive ecosystem. But conservationists reject this claim and say the project is more about money than defence. It's a smokescreen for the fact that they want this enormous commercial project. If it's national security, build a defence base. You don't need then casinos, a tourist hub, a massive transshipment port. Seven people in two companies have been charged over last year's Hong Kong housing estate fire. The Wang Fu court blaze killed 168 people, making it the world's deadliest residential building fire in decades. The blocks were under renovation at the time and the project consultancy firm and the main contractor involved in the project have been charged alongside the directors of the companies and five other individuals. The charges include manslaughter, conspiracy to defraud, money laundering, attempting to pervert the course of public justice and tax evasion. 

This investigation revealed the following problems. The use of non -fire retardant safety nets and coverings, the use of flammable foam boards and window openings at fire escape routes of staircases for workers to access the scaffolding. This had a serious effect on the building's fire safety, making it difficult for people to get out and leading to huge casualties. The head of South Korea's National Election Commission has resigned after ballot paper shortages during last week's local elections. The independent body, which oversees all elections in the country, said it printed ballot papers for 73 % of the total eligible voters, a calculation based on previous turnout rates. But polling stations in some districts have been ran out and were slow to receive additional papers. The ruling Democratic Party says it plans to launch a national inquiry into the shortages, with the president ordering a thorough investigation. 

Actually, it was just ridiculous. It destroys in an instant everything that advanced South Korea, a model democratic nation, has built up. It was probably something that's hard for even people in a lesser developed democracy to imagine that people couldn't vote, because they didn't have ballot papers. A growing homelessness crisis is unfolding in Australia. The death of Bikram Lama, a Nepali man who was sleeping rough in Sydney's CBD, has shone a light on an invisible situation, with support services warning more deaths like this will happen. Richard Mockler reports. 

Bikram, there for days while life moved all around him, and yet he was completely invisible. Tonight we remember him, a young man who came here with hope for study, for opportunity and for a future. 

Every day my team and colleagues who care for people sleeping rough meet people just like Bikram, doing everything they can to survive in a system that offers them almost nothing. 

Every time I feel so bad when I walk past through here I feel like it could have been me. I feel so scared about these things. 

I'm from Bangladesh. I have family back home. I haven't told them I've become homeless for the last couple of months. 

My dad, my mom, if I kill them I will be the reason for their death. They will not accept this one. 

I came in Australia as an international student. Almost 75 to 80 K I already spent for my study. 

I tried to apply so many jobs in my field but I didn't get opportunity. 

I tried so many organizations to give me crisis accommodation. They at first they will say do a centre link then we can help you out otherwise you have to be in a big queue and no one knows when the queue will come. 

So here at the Talbot we've got 56 beds so it accommodates 56 single men. This is a standard room that we've got here at the Talbot. As you can see smallish room and most of the guys here make it their own. Most of the men that stay here are on centre link. The majority of the men and they would pay their accommodation fees through centre link. For a non -resident they're not eligible for centre link so we would give them an emergency accommodation which would be three months free accommodation and our case workers would individually work with those guys to try and get them some form of income to be able to pay for accommodation site. 

A big proportion of the guys that we now see even in our outreach programs or in our accommodation services here trying to complete a university degree for example international students it's definitely a group that is increasing significantly in the homeless community. A big exit option for most of the guys staying here is social housing. Non -residents don't have that opportunity. Our hands are tied. Our hands are tied. Our duty is not so much to be able to pay for that. It's not that much to be able to pay for the students. At the same time we are working on a lot of our staff. They are working on a lot of staff at work on multiple staff. in terms of what we can provide as a service due to a lack of income for that individual. And they will find themselves entrenched in homelessness every time. 

I was 23 when I got sorted into this arranged marriage with the Nepalese guy who was Australian. 

And there was too much pressure for me and I had to say okay. 

Within the first two weeks of the marriage, he was already abusive. 

Then after my daughter was born, he said, I will divorce you, I'll cancel your visa, I will send you back to them. Your job is done, you've given birth. You go back to Nepal, leave the baby here. 

Since my ex -husband is Australian citizen, so my daughter is also Australian citizen. 

I can't go home back to Nepal because if I wanted to go, I would have to abandon my child. 

So if I was in the refuge, I would probably be sleeping rough. People look over people like Bikram or me because we kind of become taboos to the society. 

It's so sad that people aren't treated as human just because of the immigration status. 

There certainly needs to be help given because otherwise we will see more Bikrams, we will see more people die rough sleeping. No one should die alone and no one should die because they're homeless. 

Two years ago, a powerful earthquake rocked the Taiwanese port city of Hualien, killing 19 people and devastating the local economy. Now an unlikely attraction is drawing visitors back as part of a citywide tourism campaign. Snail racing has seen a slow but steady rise in popularity, proving that good things can take time. Welcome to Hualien, where life moves at a leisurely pace. The pride and joy of this community isn't a sports team. It's a table full of racing snails. 

Ten -year -old Larry is the lucky owner of the winner, Guagur, or brother snail. He says the contest was a nail biter. I was very stressed when watching the race because brother snail wanted to turn away. But I kept on calling him so he went back in the right direction. We went back in the right direction and eventually we won the first prize. Snail racing is no joke here. Statues of the mighty mollusk sit on street corners and merchants sell themed merchandise, encouraging visitors to shell out on a souvenir. The founder of the race says the event has been crucial for the town's recovery. 

Because of the earthquake, lots of people did not dare come to Hualien. We thought that if people could come because of the snail race, it would be helpful for the community. With an ageing population and a shortage of essential workers, it's hoped some will want to slow down enough to stay. 

The schools here really need teachers. We're also short of social workers here. Lots of positions need to be filled. Some might look at snails as a pest, but they're an important part of this family's story. Kevin and Tiara signed up for the race two years ago, but had to cancel after Tiara went into labour. 

And this year the baby is two years old and we are bringing her here for the race. This is a very meaningful event for us. Promising signs that young families are embracing life in the slow lane. Rebecca Johnston, ABC News. And that's all for this week. I'll see you next time. Bye for now. 

I'll see you next time. 

I'll see you next time. 

The Dream of Football in Tasmania is alive and well. Build it and they will come. But they're far from kicking goals. You haven't got a song or a cheer squad or a location with a training and admin centre. Organise a contract killing on me, will you? They're building a club. The inaugural coach is Luke Gorman. But keep dropping the ball. Our sponsorships just disappeared up the coach's nostrils. Why didn't you tell us about this? Should I put it on my job application? Ground up. Sunday 8 .30 on ABC. Or stream all episodes now on ABC iView. At a rural picnic spot in the dark, a young man suddenly disappears. You could nearly say an alien took him away because he's just vanished. When more clues surface, something doesn't sit right. It's nonsensical where the stuff is. It's been scattered. I'm Rob Bergen. Join me as I investigate what became of Jack in the new season of the ABC's true crime podcast, Unravel. Is it a murder? Is it someone just gone missing? Search for the Unravel podcast on ABC Listen or wherever you get your podcasts. 

Tonight, Donald Trump touches down for the G7 summit, fresh from reaching a ceasefire deal with Iran. 

Also, a former Queensland health nurse charged with 12 offences, allegedly involving six teenage girls. The Socceroos are back to business as focus turns to the US while the party continues for fans. And a blooming discovery, how a stroll in the suburbs uncovered three new species. 

You're watching ABC Late News with me, Jade Barker. First, the US and Iran have reached a ceasefire agreement, which Donald Trump claims will bring peace and security to the whole region. The planned deal includes an immediate end to hostilities and could see oil flowing back through the Strait of Hormuz by the end of the week. But many details remain unclear, and Tehran has warned its finger is on the trigger should the deal be breached. Kamin Gok reports from Washington. 

Stepping out for the main event, Donald Trump oversees the fight on the lawns of the White House as he taps out of another. More than 100 days since the US and Israel launched military action in Iran, President Trump announced a ceasefire had been struck, and that the Strait of Hormuz would soon reopen. Posting on social media, ships of the world, start your engines, let the oil flow. Confirmation of the agreement was broadcast on Iranian state television. The United States was forced to sign a memorandum to end the war with the Islamic Republic of Iran and the resistance front. The US says the agreement will be signed in Switzerland on Friday. Details are scarce, but a draft 14 -point plan leaked by Iranian state media suggests the deal could include reopening of the Strait of Hormuz within 30 days, Tehran receiving billions in reconstruction funds, and the lifting of sanctions on Iranian oil. The country's nuclear ambitions will be the subject of future negotiations. Iran will never have a nuclear weapon, and not just pursue a nuclear weapon, but procure or try to buy a nuclear weapon as well. That's built into this agreement. The deal also hinges on the immediate cessation of hostilities in Lebanon. But in the hours before the announcement, Israeli strikes against Hezbollah targets in Beirut, threatened to derail the deal. President Trump forced to make a last -minute intervention, telling the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to stop and warning all sides not to blow it. The issue of Lebanon will be central to G7 talks in France this week. The objective will be the objective. The objective will be able to see the consequences of this agreement, support for Lebanon, the long -term reopening of the Strait of Hormuz, and, of course, the conclusion of an agreement on nuclear and ballistic missiles in Iran. We want this agreement to stick because it is in the interest of people in that region to end the military conflict, but it's also in the interest of the entire world. This is the birthday present Donald Trump had hoped for, a flashy event with big news to celebrate. And while tough negotiations still lie ahead, this breakthrough could ease the political pressure he's facing at home, with rising inflation and soaring petrol prices. Previous rounds of negotiations have failed to achieve a lasting ceasefire. It's unclear whether this deal will be a knockout blow, or if the US President is celebrating too soon. Kayman Gok, ABC News, Washington. The progress towards peace has had an instant impact on the price of oil and at the petrol pump, with unleaded lower than before the war erupted. That's partly because of federal fuel relief, which is due to expire on June 30. And the Prime Minister has left the door open to extending it. The foundations of a peace deal in place, a relieved Prime Minister warns there's a long road to recovery. The end of the conflict doesn't mean that we're back to business as usual. In four short months, Australia's economy has been hammered. Inflation's up, the war sending fuel prices soaring. Unleaded reaching a peak of $2 .60 a litre in March, before the government intervened and halved the fuel excise. Now, prices are lower than before the war, around $1 .69. Diesels down two, from a record high of $3 .28 a litre to $2 .11 today. The tax relief is due to end on June 30. Cabinet to decide within days whether to extend it. I think if they can cut fuel excise while there's a cost of living issue, that would be a good thing. That decrease has really helped us out. Part of the calculation, the price of oil. The global benchmark Brent crude tumbling 4 % off the back of Donald Trump's tweet, toward a two -month low of $83 a barrel. US traded oil also down around 5%. We'd expect that to flow through to the bowels, but let's see if it's sustained. It all hinges on the Strait of Humwa's reopening unimpeded, as promised. Iran's blockade choking a fifth of the world's oil and gas trade. We're probably going to be well into next year before we're actually back to where we were just before this conflict started. As he confronts a populist party on the rise... Labor are scared. The Prime Minister highlighting the fact Australia now has more fuel in reserve than before the crisis began. Thanks to key relationships. Think about whether everyone in public life would be in a position to go to our Asian friends in Singapore, in Brunei. The fuel crisis is no longer front -page news, but it's come at a cost. More than $2 .5 billion to halve the fuel excise for three months. Despite that, the government is leaning towards extending at least some relief, conscious that cost of living is still front of mind for most voters. Jane Norman, ABC News, Canberra. The father of a nine -year -old Perth girl who was fatally shot by police in Pakistan has questioned the conduct of officers involved in his daughter's death. And the Prime Minister says he expects a transparent investigation into how the incident unfolded. This chorus of chatter during school lunch should have included Hania Ahmed's voice. The nine -year -old was killed in a police shooting in Chakwal, Pakistan, a school in Perth mourning her loss. Very friendly, bubbly, very easy to befriend. She was liked by her peers and teachers. Her family was held at gunpoint by robbers and responding police mistook them for the suspects, opening fire on their car. In an interview with SBS Erdo, Hania's father, Adil Ahmed, who was also shot, expressed anger over how his little girl, was killed. I was driving and was able to dodge them by taking turns. Otherwise, they would have murdered all of us. Punjab police say they only started shooting after the robbers opened fire on the responding officer, but Hania's father disputes that account. Very unprofessional. Very, very unprofessional. That firing was started by police at first, not by the thieves. The Prime Minister says he expects a transparent investigation, something Pakistan's crime control department maintains it's committed to. A young girl lost her life, but there have been other members of the family injured as well in circumstances which are dire indeed. It's in classrooms like this one where the nine -year -old learned and made new friends. Her classmates were to be told by the school why they wouldn't see Hania Ahmed again. Some other students who have known her and have interacted with her, played with her, are in a state of shock. Hania's 11 -year -old brother, also a student at this school, still recovering from his injuries in Pakistan from the shooting and the loss of his sister. Kaysen Ho, ABC News. A Gold Coast nurse who allegedly abused his position in a youth mental health ward to stalk and sexually abuse teenage girls has been refused bail. Derek George Jackson has been charged with 12 offences against six teenagers. An alleged pedophile operating in what's supposed to be the safest of spaces. I'm advising you that you're under arrest. Mental health nurse Derek George Jackson faced Southport Magistrates Court charged with 12 offences allegedly committed against six girls between November 2020 and May 2024. The court heard the 58 -year -old allegedly abused his position at the Gold Coast's Child and Youth Mental Health Service to stalk and sexually assault girls with complex medical issues. It's described as repeated harassment of these children who have very little opportunity to remove themselves from the situation because they were admitted to hospital. Among the alleged victims was Gian Ramsey, whose July 2025 death by suicide sparked a Queensland Health investigation. Mr Jackson was suspended from his nursing role in September 2025 when police started their investigation into complaints from parents and hospital staff. On Saturday police swooped at Brisbane International Airport. The man was going to embark on an international travel and as soon as we got word of that he was taken into custody. These offences are perpetrated against the most vulnerable youth within our society including those with serious mental health issues and disorders. Magistrate Nerida Wilson described the allegations against Mr Jackson as deeply troubling. She denied his application for bail on the basis that he was on the basis that he was a risk of re -offending and of attempting to flee the jurisdiction. His matter returns to court next month. Mark Rigby, ABC News, Gold Coast. And if you or someone you know is experiencing distress please contact Lifeline on 13 11 14. A four -week inquest has been set down into the death of a 24 -year -old man who died after being restrained by police in Alice Springs last year. Kumanjai White's family were told by NT police no charges would be laid against the officers involved clearing the way for the coroner's inquiry. A family on their way into court looking for answers into how a young disabled Walperee man Kumanjai White died in police custody. Our family has gone through too much. The whole system needs to change. 

Kumanjai White died after being restrained by two police officers in the Coles supermarket in Alice Springs in May last year. His death in custody sparked vigils and protests across the country. Two weeks ago the director of public prosecutions decided no criminal charges would be laid. The court heard the inquest will run for four weeks in April next year and will look at what happened in the lead up to Kumanjai's death. And to get evidence to determine if there was an opportunity to do something differently and to understand the circumstances. Hundreds of statements are expected to be heard during the inquest including from witnesses, supermarket employees, Mr White's family and carers and police officers. The first hearing is scheduled to take place on April 5th in Alice Springs next year. Elsie Lange, ABC News, Alice Springs. The Socceroos and their fans are still basking in the afterglow of the team's 2 -0 win over Turkiere in their World Cup opener. But the team can't afford to rest on its laurels with a match against the US in five days which has taken on even more significance. 

On World Cup debut, Socceroos goalkeeper Patrick Beach had a blind up. This is a dream come true. The 22 -year -old kept Australia in the game with eight stunning saves. This is all you think about as a kid. This is the pinnacle of football to play for your country on the world stage. It was a surprise selection over Australia's captain Matt Ryan but the call -up came with words of encouragement from the skipper. What a debut at World Cup finals. I just said enjoy it out there, you know, have fun, good luck and go do what you do. Drawing praise from one of Australia's greats. Saved by Switzer! Great save! He's done it again! Patrick Beach, I mean I take my hat off to him because the guy was outstanding. On any other day, Beach would have been player of the match but that honour fell to winger Nestori Irinkunda who scored Australia's first goal, giving him the chance to imitate his hero. Timmy Cahill is my biggest inspiration in Australian football and I look up to him and I want to be like him one day. Australia's other scorer, Connor Metcalf, is still struggling to take it all in. Nah, I'm still buzzing, you know, like... Buddy World Cup goal, you know, it's pretty sick. But it's game on again for the Socceroos after a 5am flight and just a few hours sleep. Yeah, I'm just pretty knackered to be honest. But fully aware that the nation is watching. 

Yeah, we saw him last night and nah, the scenes were incredible. There's something about this team that like no other can capture the hearts and minds of Australians every four years. The Socceroos have our attention and all eyes will be glued on their next crucial match against the United States in Seattle where they have another chance to create history. David Mark, ABC News, Vancouver. 

The UK Prime Minister has unveiled a team social media ban claiming it will go even further than Australia's policy. The move follows similar proposals around the world. 

Australia's youth social media ban was a world first, widely scrutinised before taking effect last December and tested by resourceful teens ever since. But across the pond, UK Prime Minister Keir Starmer was taking notes, now revealing a remarkably similar plan to block social media sites for under -16s. Some technology companies want us to think that social media is unchangeable, part of an almost natural order. But we have to resist that kind of learned helplessness. That's why we listen to people, have a conversation. We look carefully at the evidence, learn from countries like Australia that are taking similar steps. The proposal comes after 116 ,000 Britons responded to a call for consultation, with 90 % of parents backing a minimum age of 16 to access social media. Some still want it to go further. Good thing. Too much time spending on screens is not good for anyone, never mind someone's brain is still developing. 

16 is really a good place to start, but probably could be being brought up to 18. The UK government says it will introduce better age assurance mechanisms than Australia, which kids say have largely failed to keep them off banned platforms. Safe to say, many British teens won't give up easily either. I see little Australian kids on TikTok all the time. There's VPNs you can use, there's lots of stuff you can use. The ban will also seek to prevent children live streaming and talking to strangers on gaming apps. Teens over 16 won't be entirely left out, with a minimum age of 18 to be placed on sexual or romantic AI chatbots. Starmer plans to introduce the legislation by Christmas, to take effect before next June. Will it mean that no child ever logs on to social media again? No. But look, this might shock you, but it doesn't shock parents of teenagers. They get around other laws too. The move is the latest in a rush of countries advancing social media restrictions for kids, including Canada, Brazil, France and Indonesia. Angus McIntosh, ABC News. A trial has started in South Australia against a woman accused of murdering her elderly parents by injecting them with her own insulin. Prosecutors allege that 65 -year -old Raylene Polymiadis had previously commented on the lethal effects of the drug. A stone -faced Raylene Polymiadis walks into court with a supporter by her side. The 65 -year -old diabetic is standing trial accused of murdering her 94 -year -old parents, Brenda and Linton Anderson, who died 14 months apart in 2022 and 2023. Prosecutor Michael Fundus today alleging to the 14 -person jury she poisoned them to death, she murdered them. He said it will be alleged the couple were both administered lethal doses of insulin by their daughter. The court heard 16 years before her parents' death, Ms Polymiadis allegedly commented on the lethal effects of insulin, telling a former partner it is the perfect murder weapon or way to kill somebody because of the 